                                                  Breast Cancer Analysis

Diagnosis of Breast cancer is extremely expensive in United states. Since a large demographic of women are affected by it in their lifetime, its critical to find a cheaper and a reliable way of detecting Breast Cancer. We propose a model that can do this. Using information about the attributes of a tumor that is present in women’s chest, we try to analyze weather that tumor is malignant or benign i.e., if it causes cancer or not. We explore different models that can predict the chances of a cancerous tumor using these attributes as our predictor variables.

1 in 8 women in the U.S is diagnosed with Breast cancer at least once in their life time (BCOrg). If a cancerous tumor is detected in the early stages, it can almost always be cured. If detected in the first stage, it can be cured 99% of the time and about 86% of the time in stage 2. Most of the breast cancer cases are due to genetic mutation that happens as women age. It’s is rarely hereditary and hence cannot be easily predicted. It’s important for women to get regularly examined to reduce the risk. Currently, women can only undergo screening tests which are physical examinations and mammograms. If any abnormalities are found, then they have to undergo a bunch of very expensive tests for diagnosis. Most of the time these tests have a risk of false-negatives, meaning that the results of these tests depend on the expertise of the examiner and might not always be the most reliable. If there are false-positives, then it leads to more expensive and time-consuming tests which can cause stress and anxiety in the patient (cdc).


We know that there are two types of tumors- Benign and Malignant. A Benign tumor is not cancerous and Malignant is cancerous. Women tend to have doubt if the lumps that are formed in their chest are cancerous or not. There are many ways to test this- some tests take longer time and some tests are costly. One of such tests is Cytology- testing the abnormality of the tumor tissues under a microscope. Once we obtain the attributes of the tumor our objective is to find the main attributes that can help identify the cancerous ones. We then build a model that predicts if the tumor cell is cancerous. This would eliminate the need for physical examination and can be more reliable.
